:toc:
:icons: font
:source-highlighter: prettify
:project_id: gs-centralized-configuration

This guide walks you through the process of standing up and consuming configuration from the http://cloud.spring.io/spring-cloud-config/spring-cloud-config.html[Spring Cloud Config Server]

== What You Will Build

You will set up a
http://cloud.spring.io/spring-cloud-config/spring-cloud-config.html[Config Server] and
build a client that consumes the configuration on startup and then _refreshes_ the
configuration without restarting the client.

== What You need

:java_version: 1.8
include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/prereq_editor_jdk_buildtools.adoc[]

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/how_to_complete_this_guide.adoc[]

== Starting with Spring Initializr

For all Spring applications, you should start with the https://start.spring.io[Spring
Initializr]. The Initializr offers a fast way to pull in all the dependencies you need for
an application and does a lot of the set up for you.

This guide needs two applications. The first application (the configuration service) needs
only the Config Server dependency. The following image shows the Initializr set up for the
configuration service:

image::images/initializr-service.png[]

NOTE: The preceding image shows the Initializr with Maven chosen as the build tool. You
can also use Gradle. It also shows values of `com.example` and
`centralized-configuration-service` as the Group and Artifact, respectively. You will use
those values throughout the rest of this sample.

The following listing shows the `pom.xml` file (for the configuration service) that was
created when you choose Maven:

====
[src,xml]
----
include::complete/configuration-service/pom.xml[]
----
====

The following listing shows the `build.gradle` file (for the configuration service) that
was created when you choose Gradle:

====
[src,groovy]
----
include::complete/configuration-service/build.gradle[]
----
====

The second application (the configuration client) needs the Config Client, Spring Boot
Actuator, and Spring Web dependencies. The following image  shows the Initializr set up
for the configuration client:

image::images/initializr-client.png[]

NOTE: The preceding image shows the Initializr with Maven chosen as the build tool. You
can also use Gradle. It also shows values of `com.example` and
`centralized-configuration-client` as the Group and Artifact, respectively. You will use
those values throughout the rest of this sample.

The following listing shows the `pom.xml` file (for the configuration client) that was
created when you choose Maven:

====
[src,xml]
----
include::complete/configuration-client/pom.xml[]
----
====

The following listing shows the `build.gradle` file (for the configuration client) that
was created when you choose Gradle:

====
[src,groovy]
----
include::complete/configuration-client/build.gradle[]
----
====

NOTE: For convenience, we have provided build files (a `pom.xml` file and a `build.gradle`
file) at the top of the project (one directory above the client and service directories)
that you can use to build both projects at once. We also added the Maven and Gradle
wrappers there.

[[initial]]
== Stand up a Config Server

You first need a Config Service to act as a sort of intermediary between your Spring
applications and a (typically) version-controlled repository of configuration files. You
can use Spring Cloud's `@EnableConfigServer` to standup a config server that can
communicate with other applications. This is a regular Spring Boot application with one
annotation added to _enable_ the config server. The following listing (from
`configuration-service/src/main/java/com/example/configurationservice/ConfigurationServiceApplication.java`)
shows such an application:

====
[source,java]
----
include::complete/configuration-service/src/main/java/com/example/configurationservice/ConfigurationServiceApplication.java[]
----
====

The Config Server needs to know which repository to manage. There are several choices
here, but start with a Git-based filesystem repository. You could as easily point the
Config Server to a Github or GitLab repository. On the file system, create a new directory
and run `git init` in it. Then add a file called `a-bootiful-client.properties` to the Git
repository. Then run `git commit` in it. Later, you will connect to the Config Server with
a Spring Boot application whose `spring.application.name` property identifies it as
`a-bootiful-client` to the Config Server. This is how the Config Server knows which set of
configuration to send to a specific client. It _also_ sends all the values from any file
named `application.properties` or `application.yml` in the Git repository. Property keys
in more specifically named files (such as `a-bootiful-client.properties`) override those
in `application.properties` or `application.yml`.

Add a simple property and value (`message = Hello world`) to the newly created
`a-bootiful-client.properties` file and then `git commit` the change.

Specify the path to the Git repository by specifying the
`spring.cloud.config.server.git.uri` property in
`configuration-service/src/main/resources/application.properties`. You must also specify a
different `server.port` value to avoid port conflicts when you run both this server and
another Spring Boot application on the same machine. The following listing (from
`configuration-service/src/main/resources/application.properties`) shows such an
`application.properties` file:

====
[source,properties]
----
include::complete/configuration-service/src/main/resources/application.properties[]
----
====

This example uses a file-based git repository at `${HOME}/Desktop/config`. You can create
one easily by making a new directory and running `git commit` on the properties and YAML
files in it. The following set of commands does this work:

====
[source,bash]
----
$ cd ~/Desktop/config
$ find .
./.git
...
./application.yml
----
====

Or you could use a remote git repository (such as Github) if you change the configuration
file in the application to point to that instead.

== Reading Configuration from the Config Server by Using the Config Client

Now that you have stood up a Config Server, you need to stand up a new Spring Boot
application that uses the Config Server to load its own configuration and that _refreshes_
its  configuration to reflect changes to the Config Server on-demand, without restarting
the JVM. To do so, add the `org.springframework.cloud:spring-cloud-starter-config`
dependency, to connect to the Config Server. Spring sees the configuration property files,
as it would any property file loaded from `application.properties` or `application.yml` or
any other `PropertySource`.

The properties to configure the  Config Client must necessarily be read in _before_ the
rest of the application's configuration is read from the Config Server, during the
_bootstrap_ phase. Specify the client's `spring.application.name` as `a-bootiful-client`
and the location of the Config Server (`spring.cloud.config.uri`) in
`configuration-client/src/main/resources/bootstrap.properties`, where it will be loaded
earlier than any other configuration. The following listing shows that file:

====
`configuration-client/src/main/resources/bootstrap.properties`
[source,java]
----
include::complete/configuration-client/src/main/resources/bootstrap.properties[]
----
====

You also want to enable the `/refresh` endpoint, to demonstrate dynamic configuration
changes. The following listing (from
`configuration-client/src/main/resources/application.properties`) shows how to do so:

====
[source,java]
----
include::complete/configuration-client/src/main/resources/application.properties[]
----
====

The client can access any value in the Config Server by using the traditional mechanisms
(such as `@ConfigurationProperties` or `@Value("${...}")` or through the `Environment`
abstraction). Now you need to create a Spring MVC REST controller that returns the
resolved `message` property's value. See the
https://spring.io/guides/gs/rest-service/[Building a RESTful Web Service] guide to learn
more about building REST services with Spring MVC and Spring Boot.

By default, the configuration values are read on the client's startup and not again. You
can force a bean to _refresh_ its configuration (that is, to pull updated values from the
Config Server) by annotating the `MessageRestController` with the Spring Cloud Config
`@RefreshScope` and then triggering a _refresh_ event. The following listing (from
`configuration-client/src/main/java/com/example/configurationclient/ConfigurationClientApplication.java`)
shows how to do so:

====
[source,java]
----
include::complete/configuration-client/src/main/java/com/example/configurationclient/ConfigurationClientApplication.java[]
----
====

== Test the Application

You can test the end-to-end result by starting the Config Service first and then, once it
is running, starting the client. Visit the client app in the browser at
`http://localhost:8080/message`. There, you should see `Hello world` in the response.

Change the `message` key in the `a-bootiful-client.properties` file in the Git repository
to something different (`Hello Spring!`, perhaps?). You can confirm that the Config Server
sees the change by visiting `http://localhost:8888/a-bootiful-client/default`. You need to
invoke the `refresh` Spring Boot Actuator endpoint in order to force the client to refresh
itself and draw in the new value. Spring  Boot's Actuator  exposes operational endpoints
(such as health checks and environment information) about an application. To use it, you
must add `org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-actuator` to the client
application's classpath. You can invoke the  `refresh` Actuator endpoint by sending an
empty HTTP `POST` to the client's `refresh` endpoint:
`http://localhost:8080/actuator/refresh`. Then you can confirm it worked by visting the
`http://localhost:8080/message` endpoint.

The following command invokes the Actuator's refresh command:

====
[source,bash]
----
$ curl localhost:8080/actuator/refresh -d {} -H "Content-Type: application/json"
----
====

NOTE: We set `management.endpoints.web.exposure.include=*` in the client application to
make this is easy to test (since Spring Boot 2.0, the Actuator endpoints are not exposed
by default). By default, you can still access them over JMX if you do not set the flag.

== Summary

Congratulations! You have just used Spring to centralize configuration for all of your
services by first standing up a service and then dynamically updating its configuration.

== See Also

The following guides may also be helpful:

* https://spring.io/guides/gs/rest-service/[Building a RESTful Web Service]
* https://spring.io/guides/gs/spring-boot/[Building an Application with Spring Boot]
* https://spring.io/guides/gs/multi-module/[Creating a Multi Module Project]

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/footer.adoc[]
